.TH BAD_IPS 8 "December 2025" "Bad IPs 3.2.1" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
bad_ips \- distributed IP blocking system with centralized database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bad_ips
[\fB\-\-test\-config\fR]
[\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bad_ips
monitors system logs for malicious activity and automatically blocks offending IP addresses using nftables. It features a centralized PostgreSQL database for threat intelligence sharing across multiple servers.
.PP
When Bad IPs detects malicious activity on one server, that threat is immediately shared with all servers connected to the same database, providing distributed protection across your entire infrastructure.
.PP
.B "ALPHA STATUS:"
This software is currently in alpha testing. While it is being actively tested on live production servers, it may contain bugs and the configuration format may change in future releases. Use with appropriate caution and testing in your environment.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-test\-config
Test the configuration file syntax and detector patterns without starting the service. Useful for validating changes before applying them.
.TP
.BR \-\-dry\-run
Run in dry-run mode where IPs are detected but not actually blocked. Useful for testing pattern matching and troubleshooting.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/local/etc/badips.conf
Main configuration file containing global settings, blocking duration, trusted networks, and logging configuration.
.TP
.I /usr/local/etc/badips/log4perl.conf
Log4perl configuration file controlling log format, level, and output destination. Changes take effect in the main thread after ~5 seconds, then in each worker thread after the next reload cycle (~5 seconds + thread reload time). A log message indicates when threads will be reloaded. The 5-second interval is hardcoded in /usr/local/sbin/bad_ips and can be modified if needed (requires service restart).
.TP
.I /usr/local/etc/badips.d/database.conf
Database connection configuration including host, port, credentials, and SSL settings.
.TP
.I /usr/local/etc/badips.d/*.conf
Detector configuration files for various services (SSH, mail, web, DNS, etc.). Each detector defines systemd units to monitor and attack patterns to match.
.TP
.I /var/lib/bad_ips/
Directory for local state files and failover logs.
.TP
.I /var/log/bad_ips/bad_ips.log
Main log file for Bad IPs daemon. Configure log rotation with logrotate.
.TP
.I /usr/share/doc/bad-ips/
Documentation directory containing README and configuration guides.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.SS Main Configuration
Edit
.I /usr/local/etc/badips.conf
to configure:
.PP
.RS
.B [global]
.br
.B log_level
= debug | info | warn | error
.br
.B block_duration
= seconds to block IPs (default: 691200 = 8 days)
.br
.B never_block_cidrs
= comma-separated list of trusted IPv4 network CIDRs
.br
.B never_block_cidrs_v6
= comma-separated list of trusted IPv6 network CIDRs
.br
.B always_block_cidrs
= comma-separated list of permanently blocked IPv4 CIDRs
.br
.B always_block_cidrs_v6
= comma-separated list of permanently blocked IPv6 CIDRs
.br
.B auto_mode
= 1 to enable auto-discovery of services
.RE
.SS Database Configuration
Edit
.I /usr/local/etc/badips.d/database.conf
to configure PostgreSQL connection:
.PP
.RS
.B [global]
.br
.B db_host
= database hostname or IP
.br
.B db_port
= database port (default: 5432)
.br
.B db_name
= database name
.br
.B db_user
= database username
.br
.B db_password
= database password
.br
.B db_ssl_mode
= SSL mode (disable, require, verify-ca, verify-full)
.RE
.SS Detector Configuration
Create detector files in
.I /usr/local/etc/badips.d/
with pattern:
.I NN-name.conf
.PP
Example SSH detector
.RI ( 10-sshd.conf ):
.PP
.RS
.nf
[detector:sshd]
units = ssh.service, sshd.service
pattern1 = Failed password for invalid user
pattern2 = Failed password for root
pattern3 = Connection closed by authenticating user
.fi
.RE
.SH SYSTEMD INTEGRATION
.B bad_ips
is managed via systemd:
.TP
.B systemctl start bad_ips
Start the Bad IPs service
.TP
.B systemctl stop bad_ips
Stop the Bad IPs service (graceful shutdown with 300s timeout)
.TP
.B systemctl restart bad_ips
Restart the service
.TP
.B systemctl reload bad_ips
Reload configuration without restarting (sends SIGHUP)
.TP
.B systemctl status bad_ips
Check service status
.TP
.B journalctl -u bad_ips.service -f
View live logs
.SH NFTABLES INTEGRATION
Bad IPs creates and manages its own nftables table with six sets for dual-stack IP filtering. The configuration is stored in /etc/nftables.d/99-badips.nft and uses the prerouting hook at priority -150 for comprehensive traffic filtering.
.PP
.B IPv4 Sets:
.TP
.B nft list set inet badips never_block
View trusted IPv4 networks (static, no timeout)
.TP
.B nft list set inet badips always_block
View permanently blocked IPv4 networks (static, no timeout)
.TP
.B nft list set inet badips badipv4
View dynamically blocked IPv4 addresses (with timeout)
.PP
.B IPv6 Sets:
.TP
.B nft list set inet badips never_block_v6
View trusted IPv6 networks (static, no timeout)
.TP
.B nft list set inet badips always_block_v6
View permanently blocked IPv6 networks (static, no timeout)
.TP
.B nft list set inet badips badipv6
View dynamically blocked IPv6 addresses (with timeout)
.TP
.B nft list table inet badips
View complete Bad IPs nftables configuration
.PP
Rules are processed in precedence order for both IPv4 and IPv6:
.RS
1. IPs in never_block/never_block_v6 are always ACCEPTED
.br
2. IPs in always_block/always_block_v6 are always DROPPED
.br
3. IPs in badipv4/badipv6 are DROPPED with automatic timeout
.RE
.PP
Dynamically blocked IPs are automatically added to the
.B badipv4
or
.B badipv6
set with timeout. When the timeout expires, IPs are automatically unblocked. Static sets (never_block and always_block) are refreshed on service start and reload.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Test Configuration
.nf
bad_ips --test-config
.fi
.PP
Tests configuration syntax, database connectivity, and detector patterns.
.SS Dry Run
.nf
bad_ips --dry-run
.fi
.PP
Runs Bad IPs in detection-only mode. IPs are identified but not blocked - useful for testing patterns.
.SS View Blocked IPs
.nf
sudo nft list set inet badips badipv4
sudo nft list set inet badips badipv6
.fi
.PP
Shows all currently blocked IP addresses with their expiration times.
.SS Reload Configuration
.nf
sudo systemctl reload bad_ips
.fi
.PP
Reloads configuration files without restarting the service or clearing blocked IPs.
.SS View Debug Logs
.nf
# Set log_level = debug in /usr/local/etc/badips.conf
sudo systemctl reload bad_ips
sudo journalctl -u bad_ips.service -f
.fi
.PP
Enables verbose debug logging showing pattern matching details and IP extraction.
.SH ARCHITECTURE
Bad IPs uses a multi-threaded async architecture:
.TP
.B Main Thread
Reads system logs from systemd journal and files, applies pattern matching, extracts IPs
.TP
.B NFT Blocker Thread
Consumes IP queue and blocks IPs using nftables commands
.TP
.B Central DB Sync Thread
Syncs blocked IPs to centralized PostgreSQL database with batch processing
.TP
.B Pull Global Blocks Thread
Periodically pulls newly blocked IPs from other servers via database
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGTERM, SIGINT, SIGQUIT
Initiate graceful shutdown. Threads are given 300 seconds to drain queues before forced termination.
.TP
.B SIGHUP
Reload configuration files, detectors, and patterns without restarting the service.
.SH LOGGING
Bad IPs logs to syslog with facility
.BR local0 .
View logs with:
.PP
.nf
journalctl -u bad_ips.service
journalctl -u bad_ips.service -f    # follow/tail
journalctl -u bad_ips.service --since "1 hour ago"
.fi
.PP
Set
.B log_level = debug
in
.I /usr/local/etc/badips.conf
for verbose logging including:
.RS
- Log entries being processed
.br
- Pattern matching details
.br
- IP extraction information
.br
- Queue depths and statistics
.RE
.SH DATABASE SCHEMA
Bad IPs uses the
.B jailed_ips
table in PostgreSQL:
.PP
.nf
CREATE TABLE jailed_ips (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    ip inet NOT NULL,
    originating_server VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
    originating_service VARCHAR(255),
    detector_name VARCHAR(255),
    pattern_matched TEXT,
    matched_log_line TEXT,
    first_blocked_at BIGINT NOT NULL,
    last_seen_at BIGINT NOT NULL,
    expires_at BIGINT NOT NULL,
    block_count INTEGER DEFAULT 1,
    UNIQUE(ip, originating_server)
);
.fi
.SH NEVER-BLOCK NETWORKS
Configure trusted networks that should never be blocked in
.I /usr/local/etc/badips.conf:
.PP
.nf
[global]
never_block_cidrs = 10.0.0.0/8,172.16.0.0/12,192.168.0.0/16,127.0.0.0/8
never_block_cidrs_v6 = ::1/128,fe80::/10,fc00::/7
always_block_cidrs = 224.0.0.0/4,240.0.0.0/4
always_block_cidrs_v6 =
.fi
.PP
This prevents accidentally locking yourself out. Always include your management networks and trusted IP ranges.
.SH ALWAYS-BLOCK NETWORKS
Configure networks that should always be blocked in
.I /usr/local/etc/badips.conf:
.PP
.nf
[global]
always_block_cidrs = 198.51.100.0/24,203.0.113.0/24
.fi
.PP
Use this for known bad actor networks, geographic blocking, or competitor reconnaissance IPs. These IPs are permanently blocked at the firewall level but still logged to the database for reporting.
.PP
Precedence order (highest to lowest):
.RS
1. never_block_cidrs (always allowed)
.br
2. always_block_cidrs (always blocked IPv4)
.br
3. badipv4 (dynamically blocked IPv4 based on detections)
.br
4. always_block_cidrs_v6 (always blocked IPv6)
.br
5. badipv6 (dynamically blocked IPv6 based on detections)
.RE
.PP
Note: IPs in always_block are still added to badipv4/badipv6 and the database for reporting purposes. Different servers can have different always_block configurations based on their role.
.SH SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
.TP
.B Database Credentials
Protect
.I /usr/local/etc/badips.d/database.conf
which contains database passwords. The installer sets mode 600 (owner read/write only).
.TP
.B Never-Block CIDRs
Always configure your trusted networks in
.B never_block_cidrs
to prevent lockouts.
.TP
.B Pattern Tuning
Review and tune detector patterns to avoid false positives. Use
.B \-\-dry\-run
to test patterns before enabling.
.TP
.B Database Security
Use strong passwords and consider SSL/TLS for database connections. Set
.B db_ssl_mode = require
or higher in production.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful operation (test-config passed, service shutdown cleanly)
.TP
.B 1
Configuration error, database connection failure, or other error
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nft (8),
.BR journalctl (1),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR psql (1)
.PP
Online documentation:
.UR https://projects.thedude.vip/bad-ips/
.UE
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at:
.UR https://github.com/permittivity2/bad-ips/issues
.UE
.SH AUTHOR
Silver Linings, LLC
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2025 Silver Linings, LLC. Proprietary software.
